---

Title: "Senk"
toc: true
categories:
    - Project
tags:
    - Arduino
    - Nicla Sense ME
    - BHI260AP
    - DIY
    - BLE
excerpt: "Explore Senk — a configurable device with accelerometer and gyroscope sensors using the Arduino Nicla Sense ME."
header:

---

# Senk
_A highly configurable device equipped with accelerometer and gyroscope sensors, built using Arduino Nicla Sense ME._

## Introduction
**Senk** is a project designed to create a versatile, energy-efficient device that leverages the capabilities of the Arduino Nicla Sense ME. It integrates accelerometer and gyroscope sensors and offers high configurability via a simple configuration file.

## Objectives
The primary objectives of this project include:
- **Sensor Integration:** Utilize the accelerometer and gyroscope sensors provided by Nicla Sense ME.
- **Configurability:** Design the device to be highly configurable using a simple configuration file, allowing for versatile applications.
- **Energy Efficiency:** Implement energy-efficient practices to optimize power consumption.
- **Data Handling:** Enable the device to store sensor data in its internal memory and facilitate data transmission via Bluetooth Low Energy.

## Implementation Analysis

### Hardware Configuration

#### Arduino Nicla Sense ME
The foundation of the entire system relies on the Arduino [Nicla Sense ME](https://docs.arduino.cc/hardware/nicla-sense-me). This versatile platform integrates various sensors and communication modules crucial for the project.

##### BHI260AP - 16-Bit 6-Axis IMU
The cornerstone sensor, BHI260AP, serves as a 16-bit 6-axis Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), encompassing a 3-axis accelerometer and a 3-axis gyroscope. This pivotal component captures essential acceleration and gyroscope data from the surrounding environment.

##### 2MB QSPI Flash Memory
The 2MB QSPI flash memory plays a vital role in storing system data. However, it's essential to note that the write speed of this memory is relatively slow.

##### Bluetooth 5.0 Low Energy (BLE)
To optimize energy consumption, the project strategically utilizes Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) for data communication. This efficient protocol ensures seamless transmission of data acquired by the system, prioritizing energy efficiency in the overall implementation.

### Software

#### System Overview

##### Configuration
The system is designed to provide high modularity without sacrificing performance and energy efficiency. To achieve this, we utilize `#define` directives to configure various settings. When a configuration is turned off, all associated resources that would be utilized if it were activated are excluded and uninitialized, saving energy and memory.

##### DataSet Management
To enhance modularity and save more energy, the system organizes data into datasets. Specifically, data is collected every `DISTANCE_BETWEEN_SET` seconds, with `DATA_PER_SET` data points captured at intervals of `DATA_DISTANCE`. This dataset approach allows for high-frequency data acquisition without continuous sampling, resulting in significant battery savings.

##### DataSet Splitting
Given our device's limited RAM capacity, it's necessary to segment the dataset into smaller parts, each with a maximum length of MAX_DATASET_DIMENSION more info here. After processing each segment of the complete dataset, the data is dynamically managed: it can either be stored in local memory or transmitted using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), depending on the configuration settings.  
It's important to acknowledge that this segmentation process might cause a minor slowdown, particularly when saving data to local storage. Consider this while optimizing for swift data processing.   
To optimize this process, we have introduced an option in the application to enable data transmission via BLE between one dataset part and another in a different thread. This ensures that the distance between various data remains unchanged. However, it's important to note that enabling this may result in a slight increase in energy consumption.

##### BLE Data Acquisition
Data is shared via BLE, specifically through the creation of a `DataSend` service with a UUID specified in the configuration file. Within this service, two characteristics, namely `Accelerometer` and `Gyroscope`, are established. Both characteristics have UUIDs that can be configured through the settings file (for more information, refer to [here](https://senk.nicolasferraresso.dev/#/installation_and_configuration?id=data-transmission-configuration)).

Both characteristics transmit an array of short values representing XYZ data. It is important to note that the data is transmitted in little-endian format.\\
For example, if our gyroscope sends something like 0xFFFF0F000200, the corresponding axes values are X: -1, Y: 15, Z: 2.\\
If needed, a conversion script is available [here](https://github.com/Magform/senk/tree/main/util/conversion) to translate the transmitted data into axis values.\\

#### Class Overview

##### Senk [main]
This is the main sketch, managing sensor data acquisition with a focus on modularity and energy efficiency. Key components include sensor handling, conditional initialization of modules like `DataSaver` and `BLECommunication`, setup routines, data acquisition loop, and data transmission.

##### Data
The `Data` class encapsulates the representation and manipulation of sensor data, providing methods to convert, retrieve, and present information.

##### DataSaver
The `DataSaver` class manages the storage and retrieval of sensor data, offering functionality to save data to local storage, format storage, print file contents, and retrieve specific datasets.

##### BLECommunication
The `BLECommunication` class serves as the central manager for BLE communication, enabling the transmission of sensor data within the system. This class encapsulates crucial functions to handle initialization, data transmission, and BLE characteristic management.

##### Util
This collection comprises several utility functions designed specifically for this application, such as capturing datasets, sending data via BLE, and saving data to local storage.

## Installation and Configuration

### Prerequisites
- **Hardware Setup:** Ensure you have the Nicla Sense ME properly connected to your device.
- **Arduino IDE:** Install the Arduino IDE on your development machine.
- **Required Libraries:** Make sure to have the following libraries installed in your Arduino IDE:
  - Nicla_System
  - Arduino_BHY2
  - LittleFileSystem
  - ArduinoBLE
  - mbed
  - File
  - FileSystem

### Installation

1. **Download the Project:** Clone or download the [Senk project from the repository](https://github.com/Magform/senk).
2. **Open Project in Arduino IDE:** Load the Senk project by selecting the Senk.ino file.
3. **Configure the Arduino IDE:** Ensure you have the necessary board and port selected in the Arduino IDE.
4. **Configure Senk:** Customize Senk according to your preferences by following the [configuration guide](https://senk.nicolasferraresso.dev/#/installation_and_configuration?id=configuration).
5. **Upload the Code:** Upload the Senk code to your Nicla Sense ME.

### Configuration

The Senk project provides a range of configuration options, allowing you to customize its functionality based on your specific needs. Locate the `Configuration.h` file in the project's root directory to make adjustments.

#### Debugging Settings
- **DEBUG_STATUS:** Set to `1` to activate debugging, `0` to deactivate.

#### Data Configuration
- **DATA_PER_SET:** Total number of data in a dataset.
- **DATA_DISTANCE:** Time interval in milliseconds between two consecutive sets of data.
- **DISTANCE_BETWEEN_SET:** Milliseconds to wait between two different datasets.
- **MAX_DATASET_DIMENSION:** Automatically break datasets into manageable parts if they exceed this size.

#### Data Saving Configuration
- **DATA_SAVER:** `1` enables saving data to local storage; `0` disables it.
- **DATA_SAVER_KEEP_OPEN:** `1` enables continuous data saving to local storage without closing the file after each write operation.
- **DATA_PER_ITERATION:** Divides the complete dataset into groups for writing to the file.
- **USER_ROOT:** Specifies the root directory where the file will be saved.
- **DELETE_FILE:** Set to `1` to delete all files and only keep new data.
- **SAVE_FILE_NAME:** Name of the file containing all saved data.

#### Data Transmission Configuration
- **SEND_DATASET:** Set to `1` to send every dataset to Bluetooth after acquisition.
- **SEND_DATASET_THREAD:** Initiates a dedicated thread for transmitting every dataset to Bluetooth.
- **DATA_SENDER:** Enables reading data from the file and sending it through Bluetooth.
- **DATA_TO_SCAN:** Specifies the total lines to read and send in each file scan.
- **SCAN_TIME:** Sets the interval between two consecutive file scans.
- **SERVICE_UUID:** UUID for the main service used in the BLE communication.
- **ACCELEROMETER_UUID:** UUID for the BLE characteristic representing accelerometer data.
- **GYROSCOPE_UUID:** UUID for the BLE characteristic representing gyroscope data.

## Useful Links
- [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/Magform/senk)
- [Project Documentation](https://senk.nicolasferraresso.dev)

For more detailed information and guidance, visit the project's official documentation and GitHub repository.

